2019-12-28T00:10:15
An example of progressive enhancement

Lots of hacks, but as the standards started to gain traction, we hade the
benefit of
	- book: Designing with Web Standards
to encourage us. One of the key themes of @Zeldman's book is the design
practice of
	- Progressive Enhancement
(PE). Start with simple HTML, and adopt web features through a series
of rounds of _enhancement_, which leverage the various technologies to
provide a richer experience for the audience of the work.

For all that this has become standard practice in commercial web design,
it strikes me that there are no doubt many ways to develop the skill of
thinking in terms of creating a work through Progressive Enhancement.

The rich media and linked data aspects of the web have informed our
expectations of good design, of effective authorship. The immediacy of
publication that the web affords us leads to some pretty impulsive words,
and yet this very property has also changed our assumptions of creative
process: no work is ever done. Everything has bugs. Always something to be
made better.

 which leverage the various technologies to
provide a richer experience for the audience of the work.

For all that this has become standard practice in commercial web design,
it strikes me that there are no doubt many ways to develop the skill of
thinking in terms of creating a work through Progressive Enhancement.

The rich media and linked data aspects of the web have informed our
expectations of good design, of effective authorship. The immediacy of
publication that the web affords us leads to some pretty impulsive words,
and yet this very property has also changed our assumptions of creative
process: no work is ever done. Everything has bugs. Always something to be
made better.


I have been working on the design of this web log for a span of time that
has often struck me as absurd; I first began in 1999. The evolution of the
work may give me plenty to write about for the next few years.


Throw the first one away.

Now that I see this design emerging, I can articulate the process that may
exemplify Progressive Enhancement. By no means do I suppose that my approach
is one to be emulated, but I cannot shake my habit of "going meta" and
observing my process even as I attempt to get something actually written on
the page. This habit of self-reflection is by now impossible for me to shake,
so I might was well go with it, and see what emerges. As always.


## Start with Words

Whether I give a talk, teach a class, or write this blog, the words are my
starting point.
	- Of course I am lying; often the easiest way for me to break
writer's block is to draw a picture and then talk about it.
So that's where we begin: with (almost) free verse, almost plain text.
	- AFT


Stanford Professor Donald Knuth was once asked what he considered to be the
signature skill of Computer Science. He replied that any practitioner of
computer science must develop the ability to think and to operate in multiple
levels of abstraction at the same time.
	- Knuth Abstraction

I find that my ability to work at these multiple levels often destroys what
any right-minded person might characterize as productivity, for my love of
layers has endowed me with the attention span of a hyperactive toddler.
(My first metaphor just now was "the mind of a starving walrus", which has
a striking verssimilitude to recommend it, but (as always) on second- and
third-thought, it occured to me that hunger has a way of clearing up any other
demands for attention, such that most any moderately-peckish walrus you are
likely to encounter would indeed have a far more focused approach than what
you may be signing up for if you continue to witness my work.)
	- starving walrus

----

Ok. I start with text. Plain text. Over the years, I gave "word processors"
a go, but I quickly realized that it was almost impossible to manage an
envolution of thought from simple to enriched. I could add all of the links,
and some basic ideas such as sections and their sub-titles, but my walrus
gets too wrapped up in shiny if there are formatting knobs to tweak, and any
default format applied by the word processor distract me when I need to focus.
So I am writing this on a tiny laptop, with no active network connection, in
a command-line text editor, in a basic installation of Linux.

we used to assume that the means of distribution was to be paper, and
our workflows revolved around the demands of page layout and talking to
printers. Of course these days the primary means of distribution is the
web. Indeed the primary purpose of a computer is to search and examine
web pages.

A computer without an Internet connection is no computer at all.
	- Sun Microsysterms: "The network is the computer"

I first encountered the "World Wide Web" in the first half of 1994, and realized
almost immediately that everything else about the computer would soon cease to
matter.

The industry of the computer, the trade, had been having a conversation
with itself about the best way to construct documents in such as a way to best
interact with complex information. We knew that a single document could have
text with formatting to convey the nature of the words, the structure of a
narrative, signposts to assist a reader. There would be ways of expressing dense
information: diagrams and charts and tables, photographs. We realized that a
computer could be of vast help in the management of footnotes, references to
source documentation, bibliographies, indexes and tables of contents. A copmuter
of sufficient power could provide an interactive environment of augmented
authorship. Documents could be viewed as pages or as outlines that could be
rearranged at various levels of detail. Search and replace -- to say nothing
of the backspace key -- would transform the task of editing and refining the
work. Spell checkers were of great benefit to (at least) the poor sods pecking
away in the English language, which enjoys a pathological relationship to any
notion of orthography.

The "office" software of the day is of substantial benefit for all of these
aspects of authorship, but no such cybernetics have emerged to prevent the whole
assemblage from descending into drivel.
	- Clippy tried to save us.

Right. Excuse me. Let's get back to something that isn't a waste of your time...

My point is that, for all of the richness of these programs, only a very few
have attempted to help with a different aspect of writing, which is the
management of links, asides, embellishments, and illustrative examples. It
takes a lot of work to express all of this stuff at the level of precision
required to direct a reader to the specific bit of material. I find this somewhat
remarkable, as the signature characteristic of the web -- links and multiple
modes of presentation -- remains so difficult to get right.

This stuff is hard to write.


----


So:

1. Start with plain text
1. Add formatting, graphics that help illustrate the point
1. don't bother much with text formatting
1. add metadata: place, time, topic tags that provide context for the work
1. add links to source material, asides, footnotes, as a layer on the text
1. add formats that enable computer-aided data management
	- microformats, semantics
	- recognize that "machine learning" is leading to trust automated
	  understanding, rather than "semantic web"
	- still, basics that are characterized as
	  "SEO" (Search Engine Optimization) remain worthwhile



























 
